# Code-for-How-catastrophic-is-catastrophic-
Code for: How catastrophic is catastrophic? LiDAR assessment of forest structural change after the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires

Authors:
Kaitlyn L. Hammond (1), Craig R. Nitschke (1), Raphael Trouve (1), and Patrick J. Baker
School of Agriculture, Food, and Ecosystem Sciences, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

Correspondance: 
kaitlyn.hammond@student.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract:
Large, infrequent natural disturbances are important drivers of change in forested ecosystems. While the variability inherent in the impacts of these disturbances is a key element of conceptual models of disturbance severity and forest dynamics, few empirical studies have assessed the structural heterogeneity generated by a major fire event across spatial scales ranging from square meters to hundreds of square kilometres. In this study we used high-resolution LiDAR data collected before and after the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria, Australia---one of the most extreme fire events in the past century---to assess the impacts of fires across the broader landscape. We found that only 16% of 4-ha areas within the fire footprint experienced catastrophic stand-replacing impacts (i.e., >90% of the canopy cover was lost). Approximately half of the area within the fire footprint experienced partial canopy loss and one-third of the landscape experienced either a ground fire or no fire (i.e., no canopy loss). Analysis of a range of potential drivers of canopy loss revealed that the distribution of surviving vegetation was associated with topographic position, forest composition, and management history. Over time, the impacted forest stands will move along a broad range of developmental trajectories, forming diverse structures distributed across the affected landscape. This variability in post-fire stand structures and stand development patterns will produce a wide range of ecosystem values within and across the Central Highlands landscape. These findings provide new insights into the dynamics of the temperate eucalypt forests and can inform the development of stand-scale silviculture and landscape-scale forest management strategies.

Notes: 
The code is divided into two sections- the scripts used for processing the lidar data directly and the scripts used for analysing the output data and all other steps of the analysis.
